RESEARCH ARTICLE
COMMUNITY INTELLIGENCE AND SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES: 
A RUMOR THEORETIC ANALYSIS OF TWEETS
DURING SOCIAL CRISES1
Onook Oh
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick,
Coventry, CV4 7AL  UNITED KINGDOM  {onookoh@gmail.com}
Manish Agrawal
Department of Information Systems and Decision Sciences, College of Business Administration, University of South Florida,
4202 E. Fowler Avenue, CIS 1040, Tampa, FL  33620  U.S.A.  {magrawal@usf.edu}
H. Raghav Rao
Department of Management Science and Systems, School of Management, Jacobs Management Center,
SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14269-4000 U.S.A. and Global Service Management,
Sogang University, Seoul, SOUTH KOREA  {mgmtrao@gmail.com}
Recent extreme events show that Twitter, a micro-blogging service, is emerging as the dominant social
reporting tool to spread information on social crises.  It is elevating the online public community to the status
of first responders who can collectively cope with social crises.  However, at the same time, many warnings
have been raised about the reliability of community intelligence obtained through social reporting by the
amateur online community.  Using rumor theory, this paper studies citizen-driven information processing
through Twitter services using data from three social crises:  the Mumbai terrorist attacks in 2008, the Toyota
recall in 2010, and the Seattle café shooting incident in 2012.  We approach social crises as communal efforts
for community intelligence gathering and collective information processing to cope with and adapt to uncertain
external situations.  We explore two issues:  (1) collective social reporting as an information processing
mechanism to address crisis problems and gather community intelligence, and (2) the degeneration of social
reporting into collective rumor mills.  Our analysis reveals that information with no clear source provided was
the most important, personal involvement next in importance, and anxiety the least yet still important rumor
causing factor on Twitter under social crisis situations.1
Keywords:  Twitter, social reporting, social information processing, rumor theory, social crisis, extreme events,
community intelligence
1Hsinchun Chen was the accepting senior editor for this paper.  Michael Chau served as the associate editor.
 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2, pp. 407-426/June 2013 407

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Introduction
Social media services and consumer computing devices are
rapidly changing the way we are creating, distributing, and
sharing emergency information during social crises (Palen et
al. 2010; Palen et al. 2009; Shklovski et al. 2010; Shklovski
et al. 2008; Starbird and Palen 2010).  During large-scale
crises (e.g., natural disasters and terrorist attacks), it has
become the norm that the incident is initially reported by a
local eyewitness with a mobile communication device, the
report is rapidly distributed through social media services, and
mainstream media involvement follows (Oh et al. 2011; Oh et
al. 2010).  Indeed, online citizens have shown the potential of
being first responders who can improvise an effective emer-
gency response by leveraging their local knowledge, typically
not available to professional emergency responders who are
not familiar with the local community (Li and Rao 2010).
Despite these advantages, many warnings have been raised
about the information quality of crisis reports contributed by
voluntary online citizens.  A recent examination of some of
Google’s real-time search results for Tweeter and blogs
reveals that real-time information was mostly “fabricated
content, unverified events, lies and misinterpretation”
(Metaxas and Mustafaraj 2010, p. 1).  For this reason, and
despite the potential of social media services and voluntary
reports, they are often despised as collective rumor mills that
propagate misinformation, gossip, and, in extreme cases,
propaganda (Leberecht 2010).
Acknowledging the duality of social media as a potential tool
for social reporting and a collective rumor mill, this study
explores the information quality issue in the context of social
crises and media crises.  We conceptualize the participatory
social reporting phenomenon as collective intelligence and
information processing to make sense of, cope with, and adapt
to situational and informational uncertainties under crises
(DiFonzo and Bordia 2007).   This study attempts to answer
two questions: 
 (1) Under what conditions does collective social reporting
function as a community intelligence mechanism to
address crisis problems?
 (2) Under what conditions does social reporting degenerate
into a rumor-mill?
To develop a theoretical framework for these questions, we
rely on the literatures on rumor and social crises.  To empi-
rically test the framework, we analyze Twitter data from three
different crisis incidents:  the Mumbai terrorist attack in 2008,
the Toyota recalls in 2010, and the Seattle café shooting
incident in 2012.
This paper proceeds as follows.  In the next section, we intro-
duce the literatures on rumors and social crises.  We then
synthesize these two literatures to develop our research model
and hypotheses.  After that, the research methodology is intro-
duced, hypothesis tests are performed, and results are dis-
cussed.  In closing, limitations and future research possi-
bilities are suggested.
Social Crisis and Information Issues
Social crises are characterized by the severe consequences of
the incident, low probability of incident occurrence, informa-
tional and situational uncertainty, and decision-making pres-
sure under time constraints (Runyan 2006).  Unfamiliar,
unplanned, and unpredictable crisis situations quickly render
inoperative day-to-day routine practices which sustain some
level of social behavior, communication norms, and norma-
lized interaction (Stallings and Quarantelli 1985).  Inevitably,
this out-of-the-ordinary crisis situation accompanies collective
anxiety, improvised group behaviors, and adaptive collabo-
ration among the public (Bharosa et al. 2010; Janssen et al.
2010; Kendra and Wachtendorg.  2003; Majchrzak et al.
2007).
One of the main problems that have caused obstruction of
improvised collaboration within and between the public and
emergency responders has been the complexity in information
processing and sharing (Bharosa et al. 2010; Jenvald et al.
2001; Singh et al. 2009; Yang et al. 2009).  Scanlon (2007)
relates the unusual and improvised communication behavior
under large-scale social crisis to the information convergence
phenomenon that suddenly overloads major communication
systems.  This out-of-the-ordinary communication behavior
during a crisis is associated with the twin problems of infor-
mation overload and information dearth (Shklovski et al.
2008).
Information overload and information dearth signify the two
enduring and interlocking problems that prevent sense-
making of urgent situations and emergency response opera-
tions.  First, from the emergency responders’ perspective, too
many inquiries and reports, many of which are not accurate or
reliable, hamper emergency response teams in efficiently
delivering relevant and trustworthy information to the right
responders at the right time (Bharosa et al. 2008; Bharosa et
al. 2010).  For example, during the Mumbai terrorist attacks,
the police control room was flooded with incorrect reports of
explosions at leading hotels such as the J. W. Marriott
(Chakraborty et al. 2010).  Second, from the perspective of a
citizen, the information dearth problem indicates a lack of
 408 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
local information, desperately needed by citizens of affected
areas to make localized decisions.  As the main cause of the
information dearth problem, the disaster literature identifies
mainstream media.  The literature maintains that institutional
mainstream media have a tendency to repeatedly zoom in on
the sensational aspects of a disaster from a single onlooker’s
perspective (Wenger and Friedman 1986), and they are highly
dominated by cultural influences or institutional policies.  As
a result, rather than trusting mainstream media, citizens often
turn to their own local social networks or resources at hand to
obtain local information that is relevant and needed for their
understanding of the local situation and decision making
(Mileti and Darlington 1997; Shibutani 1966; Wenger and
Friedman 1986).  Therefore, it is not surprising that unex-
pected social crises in recent years almost always involve
high traffic in social media websites through various forms of
information exchange, including online posting, linking,
texting, tweeting, retweeting, etc.
To root the study in a robust theoretical framework, the next
section introduces rumor theory in the context of crisis
communication, and suggests testable hypotheses along with
key variables.
Theoretical Foundation:  Rumor
Theory and Social Crises
From a social psychological perspective, Shibutani (1966)
relates rumor phenomena to information convergence, which
typically occurs in the early stages of a social crisis.  He
considers rumoring as a collective and improvised infor-
mation seeking and exchanging behavior among citizens to
control social tension and solve crisis problems.  Rumoring is
defined as a collective and collaborative transaction in which
community members offer, evaluate, and interpret information
to reach a common understanding of uncertain situations, to
alleviate social tension, and to solve collective crisis problems
(Bordia 1996; Bordia and DiFonzo 1999, 2004; Shibutani
1966).  Rumor, as an instance of crisis communications in a
community, is born and makes its way through social support
(Festinger 1962).  From its birth, as rumor involves commu-
nication dynamics surrounding shared issues in a community,
the generation and transmission of rumor are inseparable in
practice.  Therefore, to highlight the connective and dynamic
nature of rumor, this paper uses the terms like rumor,
rumoring, and rumormongering interchangeably.
When people encounter unexpected crisis events, emotional
tension in the affected community increases.  To release the
social tension, people initially turn to reliable institutional
channels such as the mainstream media and attempt to make
sense of uncertain situations with the information collected.
At this initial stage, if people in the affected community fail
to obtain relevant and timely information, they begin to
mobilize informal social networks such as friends, neighbors,
local news, and other possible sources.  Then, using the infor-
mation collected through these backchannels, people
improvise news to fill the information gap of mainstream
media.  Shibutani (1966) calls this informally improvised
news as rumor, which functions as a collective effort to reach
a common understanding of the situational uncertainty and to
relieve emotional tension.  In this view, rumoring helps the
community to cope with and adapt to ambiguous crisis situa-
tions until the level of social tension is brought under check.
Shibutani’s description of the rumoring procedure as a kind of
emergency communication endeavor concurs with many
findings of crisis research, which report that victims avoid
mainstream media and actively adopt informal communica-
tion channels during social crisis events (Quarantelli and
Wenger 1989).  According to a survey of citizens affected by
the Southern California wildfires in 2007, many respondents
felt that the institutional mainstream media were not providing
local information, desperately needed by residents of the
affected areas, in a timely manner (Mills et al. 2009; Sutton et
al. 2008).  In response, many people turned to social media
services to fill the information gap left by mainstream media
(Shklovski et al. 2008), and others intentionally learned how
to use texting devices and online message boards to exchange
crisis information and to stay connected with their acquain-
tances (Shklovski et al. 2010).
Although originating from different domains, the rumor
research and crisis research camps have close affinity in that
both camps view improvised and emergent crisis communi-
cation as a typical nonroutine group behavior.  One major
difference is that, while the former camp approaches the
improvised crisis communication as a rumor phenomenon, the
latter takes the perspective of information convergence, which
overloads the communication infrastructure.  However, a
close reading of both literatures reveals that rumor phenom-
ena and information convergence are interlocking problems
born out of unpredictable, unfamiliar, and unplanned social
crisis situations.  This is easy to see when rumor researchers
argue that “disasters and other crises are characterized by high
importance, high ambiguity, low critical sensibility, and many
rumors” (Rosnow and Fine 1976, p. 52), or “in wartime…the
conditions for rumor are optimal” (Allport and Postman 
1947, p. 34).
Close kinship between studies of rumor and social crises is
also found in the seminal rumor model of Allport and Post-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 409

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
man (1947).  The rumor model was the product of a study of
unusual group communication during social crises.  After
investigating the characteristics of rumors prevalent during
World War II, they suggested that rumor spread is a function
of importance and informational ambiguity.  This implies that,
for the birth and dissemination of a rumor, the theme of the
story must be important to both message sender and recipient,
and the truthfulness of the story must be masked with some
level of ambiguity.  If the story is not important, there is no
psychological incentive for people to pass along the story to
other persons.  Also, if the story does not contain some level
of ambiguity, then it is already a fact that does not need
subjective elaboration and interpretation.  This seminal rumor
model is expanded, refined, and tested in this paper.  The next
sections introduce key rumor variables to build empirically
testable hypotheses.
Anxiety
Although Allport and Postman’s rumor model offered key
variables for rumormongering conditions, measurement of the
importance variable was a thorny problem until Anthony
(1973) introduced anxiety as its proxy variable.  Her rationale
for employing the anxiety measurement scale (i.e., Taylor
Manifest Anxiety Scale) was that it may be difficult for a
person to articulate the importance of a particular rumor.
However if one feels anxious about the rumor, it signals that
the content in the rumor message is important to her/him.
Otherwise, it is not.  
The inclusion of the anxiety concept contributes in differ-
entiating two conceptually distinct dimensions of rumor-
mongering motives:  the affective dimension (anxiety) and the
cognitive dimension (ambiguity).  Allport and Postman ex-
pressed a similar notion that rumor is motivated by “intellec-
tual pressure along with the emotional” (p. 37).  Emotional
pressure indicates the affective dimension (anxiety), and
intellectual pressure points to the cognitive dimension (ambi-
guity) of rumoring.  To develop the first hypothesis, in this
section, we focus on the affective dimension of anxiety, and
the cognitive dimension will be revisited when we introduce
the second hypothesis in the next section.
According to Allport and Postman, seen from the affective
dimension, rumoring is a justification process to relieve one’s
emotional tension by elaborating a story to gain acceptance
from listeners.  Therefore, the more anxious an individual, the
more likely he/she is to spread rumors.  The consistent con-
clusion of rumor research on social crisis is that rumor
endures until the perceived external uncertainty disappears
and its attendant anxiety subsides (Knapp 1944; Prasad 1935,
1950; Rosnow and Fine 1976).  Following these findings, and
given the uncertain and apprehensive nature of social crises,
the first hypothesis is presented:
H1:  The level of anxiety during social crises is posi-
tively associated with rumors (rumormongering).
Information Ambiguity:  Source Ambiguity
and Content Ambiguity
In addition to anxiety, ambiguous information is another
important factor of rumor spread.  Ambiguous information is
mainly caused either by the destructive impact of disasters,
which suddenly incapacitate communication infrastructures
(Kendra and Wachtendorg 2003), or by the deliberate holding
back of critical information by organizations in the interests
of security (Rosnow 1991).  Under extreme and ambiguous
situations, people frequently experience a shortage of reliable
information to understand uncertain situations and, conse-
quently, tend to improvise news to fill the gap of information
ambiguity with subjective elaboration, fanning the rumor mill
(Shibutani1966).
Rumor researchers implicitly present two different dimensions
of information ambiguity:  source ambiguity and content
ambiguity.  Source ambiguity concerns the trustfulness of the
information source, which guarantees the veracity of the cir-
culating information.  Content ambiguity attends to the inter-
pretative clarity of meaning contained in the information.
Shibutani’s notion of improvised news as rumor implies both
dimensions of source ambiguity and content ambiguity.
Facing social crises, people initially turn to institutional news
channels to obtain reliable information, and then mobilize
unofficial social networks to fill the information gap of the
institutional news channels.  In a similar vein, many rumor
researchers have also argued that, when information is void of
trustful sources, people tend to make predictions with their
own subjective wishes or bounded knowledge to reduce
cognitive ambiguity (Knopf 1975; Rosnow 1991; Rosnow and
Fine 1976).  It can be inferred from this logic that, if informa-
tion is attached with verifiable sources, then it may suppress
the incentive to devise rumors.
Content ambiguity refers to the level of interpretive ambiguity
contained in the information.   Fundamentally, it stands on the
underlying assumption that “our minds protest against chaos”
(Allport and Postman 1947, p. 37).  From a cognitive perspec-
tive, the intellectual effort to extract clear meaning out of a
chaotic state is an endeavor to remove ambiguity from the
information (DiFonzo and Bordia 2007; Festinger 1962;
Kapferer 1990; Knopf 1975; Rosnow and Fine 1976).  There-
 410 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
fore, the more ambiguous the information content, the more
frequent communications of information seeking, sharing, and
elaboration among community members.
Festinger’s (1957) description of cognitive dissonance exem-
plifies the relationship between ambiguous information and
rumoring.  He explains cognitive dissonance with the example
of an earthquake in India in 1934.  Subsequent to the severe
earthquake, fearsome rumors began to circulate outside, but
not inside, the affected community.  These rumors were
mostly about the aftermath of the earthquake:  “The water of
the River Ganges disappeared at the time of the earthquake,
and people bathing were embedded in sand” (p. 238).  To
explain why these rumors were prevalent only outside, but not
inside the destruction area, Festinger argues that the neigh-
boring people outside the destruction area were experiencing
cognitive dissonance.  That is, although they had the feeling
of fear from hearing about the earthquake, because they had
not witnessed the disaster, they only had uncertain and equi-
vocal information about the earthquake.  What Festinger’s
cognitive dissonance work suggests is that rumor sets in
motion “in situations of relative collective ignorance and
ambiguity about an event” (Tierney and Aguirre 2001, p. 5).
Given that social crises create uncertain information, which is
void of trustful source and contains interpretive ambiguity, the
second hypothesis is presented as follows:
H2a:  The level of source ambiguity in the circu-
lating information during social crises is positively
associated with rumors (mongering).
H2b:  The level of content ambiguity in the circu-
lating information during social crises is positively
associated with rumors (mongering).
Personal Involvement
Although Anthony employs anxiety as a proxy to measure the
importance variable of Allport and Postman’s original rumor
model, Rosnow (1991) suggests including the perceived
importance as a separate variable.  He refines it as “outcome-
relevant involvement” to indicate that “the amount of rumor-
mongering will vary according to an incident’s thematic
importance” to the people involved (Rosnow 1991, p. 486).
This is consistent with Allport and Postman’s postulate that
“the amount of rumor circulation will vary with the impor-
tance of the subject to the individuals concerned” (p. 34). 
This means that for a rumor to spread, the incident’s subject
matter must be important for both the information sender and
recipient.  Otherwise, there is no incentive for the recipient to
pass along the story to other persons.  In this sense, impor-
tance is represented as a subjective feeling of personal
involvement2 in the rumor related incident, which is con-
ceptually different from Anthony’s anxiety.
Rosnow believes that the personal “affective state—acute or
chronic” is an important rumor spreading factor, because it is
not necessarily evoked by external events, but somehow is
already imbued with personal disposition even before experi-
encing the rumor related incidents (p. 487).  The external
incident’s importance to the individual concerned is based on
“a synthesis of the relevance of a situation and whether it
evoked caring or involvement” (p. 487).  Rosnow et al.’s
(1988) rumor research on a murder incident at a local college
supports the argument.  It revealed that the student group of
the college, which experienced the murder incident, trans-
mitted almost twice the number of rumors compared to the
control group of the neighboring college.  While this research
did not include importance or personal involvement as an
independent variable, we can surmise that the college student
group who experienced the shocking murder incident in their
campus dorm may have had higher levels of personal involve-
ment perception with the incident than the control group.
From this, we submit a third hypothesis on the role of per-
sonal involvement feeling in rumor transmission:
H3:  Feelings of personal involvement with regard
to social crises is positively associated with rumors
(mongering).
Social Ties:  Direct Message
Rumoring involves collective talking, interactive information
sharing, and social support (Festinger 1962) among like-
minded groups of people.  By nature, people tend to share
information with acquaintances within their communal bound-
ary, and “people are biased toward believing rumors from
those they know” (Garrett 2011, p. 259).  Therefore, social
ties, personal contacts, and relations in close proximity are
factors that influence people to share information with other
community members (Collins 2001), and they form repeatable
communication routines through which information flows
(Tsai and Ghoshal 1998).
Although the social tie concept has not been extensively
tested as a distinct variable in previous rumor studies, its
importance has been sporadically mentioned with different
expressions.  For example, Allport and Postman maintain that
2We thank an anonymous reviewer who suggested adding the personal
involvement variable to our original rumor model.  
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 411

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
rumors “avoid crossing social barriers and therefore have a
restricted circulation” (p. 35).  In a similar vein, Festinger
suggests that social support is mandatory for rumor dissemi-
nation.  These concepts imply that a rumor is more likely to
spread within a community that is sustained by affective trust
and strong social ties.   That means, in a tightly woven com-
munity, affective social ties are likely to impose “social
pressure against fact-checking,” reducing “the probability that
recipients will verify the information for themselves” (Garett
2011, pp. 259-260).
Garett’s (2011) political rumor research shows the effect of
existing social ties on rumor transmission.  His survey pro-
vides evidence that, compared to rumors learned from the
public web, rumors received through e-mails from acquain-
tances (e.g., friends, colleagues, or family members) are more
likely to be believed and biased in the pattern of dissemi-
nation and credulity.  As a reason for the strong bias effect of
e-mail communication on rumor, Garret maintains that,
different from the public web, e-mail is a closed and more
informal communication channel, capitalizing on existing
social networks such as friends, colleagues, and family
members.
As an extension of this rumor study, Garret suggests that
social networking services (i.e., Facebook and Twitter) may
replicate rumor dynamics similar to those shown in e-mail
communication.  The main reason is that, similar to informal
e-mail communication and different from the public web,
social networking sites are mainly built around existing social
relations.  Acknowledging the effect of social relations on
rumor transmission, we propose that directed messages (DM)
in Twitter,3 which are addressed to specific individuals in the
Tweeter’s social network, may be more likely to result in
rumors.  Therefore, a fourth hypothesis is proposed:
H4:  Directed messages in Twitter are positively
associated with rumor (mongering).
In aggregate, our research model on rumormongering is
represented as Figure 1.
Research Methodology
To test our hypotheses, we used three different Twitter data
sets:  (1) the Mumbai terrorist attack in 2008, (2) the Seattle
café shooting incident in 2012, and (3) the Toyota recalls in
2010.  The first two data sets represent man-made crises but
with different scales and impacts, and the third data set deals
with the business crisis of Toyota recalls.
 
These three types of incidents are appropriate for this research
for two reasons.  First, as the rumor literature suggests, large-
scale crises offer optimal conditions for rumor-mongering. 
Second, analysis of data from three different types of social
crisis will offer generalizable insights on the quality of social
information produced by the online public.
Backgrounds of the Three Social
Crises Under Analysis
The Mumbai Terrorist Attack in 2008
The Mumbai terrorist attack of November 2008 was arguably
the worst terrorist incident in the history of India.  A group of
terrorists killed 165 and injured 304 people at the heart of
India’s financial capital, Mumbai, by using a combination of
improvised explosive devices, grenades, and hand-held guns
(Indian Ministry of External Affairs 2009).  The unfolding
tragedy was broadcast live through India’s mainstream TV
media and live web streaming for almost 60 hours without
any restraint.  The scenes were terrifying enough to create
anxiety and confusion in the minds of the Indian people (Oh
et al. 2011; Raman 2009).
Within minutes of the initial attack, a local Mumbai resident
posted a stream of onsite pictures at a photo sharing site,
Flickr.  Almost concurrently, a group of people voluntarily
formed a Twitter page with a link to the Flickr site, and
spread eyewitness accounts of the terrorist attacks with texts,
photos, and links to other sources.  Through tweets, online
users expressed condolences, encouraged blood donations,
posted help line contacts, broadcast information about their
safety to their family, reported eyewitness accounts of the
unfolding situation, etc.
For active situational reports, some users added comments
like “twitter rocks – I am getting accurate and better informa-
tion than MSM like Times Now!” or “CNN has been playing
catch up to twitter :).”  However, despite the rapid dissemi-
nation of situational information, much confusion existed in
the Twitter space due to too many rumors (Gahran 2008).  As
a result, many Twitter users expressed concerns regarding the
reliability of news sources,4 finger-pointed specific users as
3Directed message is a message sent to specific Twitter user by attaching
“@” in front of the recipient’s Twitter ID.  It can be sent to a specified user.
Therefore, conceptually it is close to publicly displayed private e-mail.
4Some exemplary tweets expressing concerns about rumors were “#mumbai
Please tweet only direct observations, RT rumors are just decreasing the
signal/noise ratio” and “where did you get that info? its crap.  all of this is
live on TV.  pls stop spreading such stuff without verifying #mumbai.”
 412 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Anxiety (H1)
Information Ambiguity
     - Source Ambiguity (H2a)
     - Content Ambiguity (H2b)
Personal Involvement (H3)
Social Ties (DM) (H4)
Rumor (mongering)
(+)
(+)
(+)
(+)
Figure 1.  Proposed Research Model
abusers of the Twitter space, showed distrust in Twitter, or
requested Twitter users to post only direct observations. 
Seattle Café Shooting Incident in 2010
On May 20, 2012, a gunman in Seattle, Washington, killed
five people and injured one person before committing suicide.
It was reported that the gunman had gotten into fights with
musicians at Café Racer and have been made to leave by a
bartender.  At that moment, he pulled out two handguns and
shot at customers and employees.  He fled the scene imme-
diately, going to a parking lot in the downtown area where he
killed a woman and hijacked her car.  Later that afternoon, the
gunman shot himself to death as the police approached him
(CNN 2012; McNerthney 2012).  During the search operation,
the Mayor, the Seattle Police Department, and local news
outlets (such as Seattle Times, Seattle PI, Komo News, etc.)
were deeply involved in tweeting to broadcast the unfolding
situation.
The police at first treated the shooting incidents at the café
and the parking lot as separate crimes.  The informational
confusion and ambiguous situations about the shooters’
whereabouts created discomfort in the minds of community
members (Johnson 2012; Winter 2012).  Many people ex-
pressed anxiety and doubted the quality of information
circulating through Twitter.  Example tweets included 
“Twitter is not a great place to get reliable sourcing on
#Seattle shootings right now.  So many conflicting reports,”
or “#DowntownShooting #RooseveltShooting How does this
make sense? Suspect Downtown was blond and suspect on
Roosevelt was brown haired?”
Toyota Recalls in 2010
Starting from the end of 2009 and throughout 2010, Toyota
suffered from a series of recall nightmares.  In September
2009, Toyota announced its biggest recall ever of more than
4 million vehicles for a problem related to accelerator pedals
getting trapped in the floor mat.  Four months later, in January
2010, they announced another large-scale recall of around 2.3
million vehicles in the United States for potentially faulty
accelerator pedals (Allen and Sturcke 2010).  In April 2010,
they recalled around 600,000 minivans in the United States
for potential corrosion problems in the spare tire carrier cable.
In July 2010, they announced additional recalls of over
400,000 cars in the United States and Canada for more serious
mechanical problems in the steering system, which could
cause deadly road accidents (Reuters 2010).
Following the serial recalls, in May 2011, sales of Toyota
declined by a third compared to May 2010.  To make matters
worse, along with the effect of the economic downturn
affecting the overall U.S. car industry, the company faced a
backlash from the mainstream and social media for their
problematic safety checks, quality controls, and frequent
recalls.  Reflecting the impact of the business crises and its
attendant consumer safety concerns, during the recall periods,
Toyota became a trend word on Google and Twitter, mostly
with negative comments (Wasserman 2011).
Data Collection
The data collection process for the three crisis incidents is
detailed below.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 413

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Mumbai Terrorist Attack 2008
As soon as the Mumbai terrorist attack occurred on November
26, 2008, we manually collected 929 tweet messages and their
user IDs.  Subsequently, to increase the sample size, we read
through the 929 tweet messages and collected additional user
IDs embedded in the tweet messages as a form of directed
message or retweets.  Through this process, we identified total
602 IDs of users who might have posted messages during the
Mumbai attack.   By tracking back all Twitter messages of
those 602 IDs,5 we collected a total of 20,920 Twitter mes-
sages for the period November 26 to November 30, 2008.  For
our qualitative hand coding of the data, we randomly selected
7,000 Twitter messages out of the entire set of Twitter mes-
sages.  One of the authors and two Master’s students (who
were familiar with the Mumbai scenario from personal
experience) read through all the 7,000 tweets to remove
thematically irrelevant tweets.
Toyota recalls 2010
Twitter data on the 2010 Toyota recalls was obtained from
Stefan Stieglitz and Nina Krüger (2011).6  The sample size
that we received from Stieglitz and Krüger was 37,323 tweets,
which were collected between March 21 and July 31, 2010,
by using the keyword combination of “Toyota” and “recall.” 
From the data we obtained, we randomly selected and read
5,000 tweets to check if they were relevant to the Toyota
recalls.  All tweets were relevant to the Toyota recalls and we
saved them for pilot and actual coding for our study.
Seattle Café Shooting 2012
As soon as we heard the news about the shooting incident in
Seattle, Washington, at 5:20 p.m. Central Time on May 30,
2012, we began data collection with four hashtagged key-
words:  #DowntownShooting, #SeattleShooting, #Seattle, and
#RooseveltShooting.  Those hashtagged keywords were deter-
mined by our monitoring of the live tweet messages through
the Twitter search engine.  We concluded our data collection
at 2:00 p.m. Central Time on May 31, when we heard the
official news that the shooter had committed suicide.  We
collected a total of 9,104 tweet samples during the period.
Unitizing
Bordia and DiFonzo (1999, 2004) suggest that, before content
coding, a paragraph, sentence, or narrative should be dis-
sected into a unit of one complete thought.  They suggest that
“a complete thought provides enough information so that it
can be interpreted by others and can stimulate a reaction in
them” (Bordia and DiFonzo 2004, p. 38).  Given that the
Twitter message has a maximum of 140 characters, our data
sample was already unitized into a unit of one complete
thought for coding.
Coding Scheme
We coded each tweet message to measure the effect of
anxiety, information ambiguity (content ambiguity and source
ambiguity), personal involvement, and direct message on
rumor.
Detailed coding schemes for dependent and independent
variables are attached as Appendix A.   To develop the coding
scheme for the dependent variable, rumor, we referred to
various rumor definitions (Buckner 1965; Rosnow et al. 1988;
Rosnow and Kimmel 2000).  To create the coding scheme for
independent variables, we modified the rumor interaction
analysis systems (RIAS) to our research context (Bordia and
DiFonzo 2004).  The RIAS is a coding scheme to categorize
communication postures represented in rumor text into 14
categories.  Its purpose is to understand how interactive
human communication changes over the life of a rumor to
solve two problems (anxiety and uncertainty) implied in
rumor.  However, as the purpose of our study is to identify the
rumor causing factors, we borrowed only those definitions
relevant to our rumor model (Figure 1) (e.g., apprehensive
statement for anxiety, personal involvement statement, and
interrogatory statements for content ambiguity).
To code the dependent variable, rumor, we used Rosnow and
Kimmel’s (2000) rumor definition:  “Unverified proposition
or belief that bears topical relevance for persons actively
involved in its dissemination” (p. 122, italics addedl).  We
also referred to the actual questionnaire items that Rosnow et
al. (1988) used in their rumor research on the murder incident
at a campus dorm of a local college:  “any report, statement,
or story that one may have heard for which there is no
immediate evidence to verify its truth” (p. 32, italics added). 
Finally, to sharpen the relevance of theme in the Twitter
messages, we employed Buckner’s (1965) rumor definition: 
“Unconfirmed message passed from one person to another…
that refer[s] to an object, person, or situation rather than an
idea or theory” (p. 55, italics added).
5To retrieve the archival Twitter messages, we created our own Twitter data
collection application in compliance with Twitter API terms of service.  The
application is available from the authors on request.
6 The authors thank Drs. Stieglitz and Krüger for generously allowing us to
use their Twitter data for our study.
 414 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
In brief, these rumor definitions involve three dimensions:
unverified proposition, topical relevance, and referents of the
statement (that is, an object, person, or situation rather than an
idea or theory).  Therefore, in the Twitter context, three
conditions have been applied to code a tweet as a rumor: 
(1) if the tweet message explicitly indicates a person (e.g., the
prime minister of India), source (e.g., BBC, NDTV, link to
web address, etc.), context, or known data to serve as proof or
verification for the statement, AND (2) if the tweet is
topically relevant to three types of crises under this study,
AND (3) if the tweet statement refers to an object, person, or
situation rather than an idea or theory (Bordia 1996; Rosnow
et al. 1988; Rosnow and Kimmel 2000; Buckner 1965).
Rumor and all independent variables were coded as dichot-
omous (either 1 or 0).  Along with exemplary tweet messages,
the full coding scheme for dependent and all independent
variables is detailed in Appendix A.
All variables were coded as dichotomous because of the
content analytic coding procedure used.  Previous rumor
studies in the off-line context have used survey or interview
methods along with psychometric measurement scales as a
means to measure the perceived level of different variables
(e.g., anxiety, importance, ambiguity, etc.) on an interval
scale (Anthony 1973; Buckner 1965; Rosnow et al. 1988).
However, as our study involves reading and content coding
for the unobtrusively collected tweet texts, we coded our
variables as dichotomous by checking whether or not a tweet
message contains traits of variables suggested in our research
model.
Inter-Coder Reliability
We followed the steps for content coding and analysis sug-
gested by Krippendorf (1980) and Landis and Koch (1977).
For the content coding, two Master’s and two undergraduate
students were hired to separately code the Twitter data.  Two
Master’s students with deep local knowledge of Mumbai, its
surroundings, and the terrorist attacks separately coded the
Mumbai terrorist attack data.  Two other undergraduate stu-
dents separately coded the Seattle café shooting incident data.
After finishing the coding of those two data sets, one Master’s
and one undergraduate student independently coded the
Toyota recall data.
 To build a coding book (Appendix A), three meetings were
held to understand the histories of the three different social
crises and the role of Twitter during those crises situations.
The authors were not involved in content coding.  Hypotheses
and measurement models were not shared with student coders,
and they were not allowed to communicate with each other
while coding.  They were asked not to spend more than an
hour each day coding the data in order to miminize coding
errors due to fatigue.
Pilot data coding was carried out in two rounds for the
Mumbai terror data, and in three rounds for the Seattle café
shooting and Toyota recall data sets.  Our goal for pilot
coding was to repeat coding and refine the coding book until
independent coding results reached the kappa value greater
than .70, indicating a probability of agreed understanding
between coders that is significantly higher than what can be
obtained by chance (Krippendorf 1980; Landis and Koch
1977).7
The first pilot coding was to verify the level of mutual under-
standing of the coding book.  For the first pilot coding, we
used 100 tweet samples that we randomly selected from our
original data sets.  If the first pilot coding result did not reach
the threshold kappa value of .70, then two authors and all
student coders conducted video conferences to discuss the
disagreed coding results.  As Table 1 shows, the coding result
for the Mumbai terrorist attacks exceeded the desired
threshold kappa value of .70 at the first round of coding.
Therefore, coders performed coding with 300 sample tweets.
Coding for the other two data sets (Toyota recalls and Seattle
café shooting) exceeded the threshold kappa value of .70 after
the second round of coding.  Therefore, we proceeded to the
third round of coding for these two data sets with 300 sample
tweets each.  The final pilot coding results with 300 tweet
messages confirmed that our coding book is robust, and
therefore, one Master’s and two undergraduate student coders
proceeded to separately code the entire 3,500 tweet data
samples of the three different social crises.  We ensured that
the pilot sample data (400 tweet sample for the Mumbai
terrorist attacks and 500 tweet samples for the Toyota recalls
and the Seattle shooting incident) were excluded from 3,500
sample data of three different incidents (total 10,500 tweets)
that we used for our logistic regression analysis.
Analysis Method
Due to the dichotomous nature of the dependent variable
(rumor), we employed logistic regression.  Logistic regression
is appropriate “with an outcome variable that is dichotomous
and predictor variables that are continuous or categorical”
(Field 2005, p. 218).  It does not assume linear relationships
7Landis and Koch suggest that kappa value 0.21~0.40 is fair, 0.41~0.60
moderate, 0.61~0.80 substantial, and 0.81~1.00 almost perfect agreement
between independent coders.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 415

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Table 1.  Pilot Coding Results (Cohen’s Kappa Values)
 
Mumbai Terrorist
  Attack 2008 Toyota Recalls 2010 Seattle Café Shooting 2012
 1
st
Coding
2nd
Coding
1st
Coding
2nd
Coding
3rd
Coding
1st
Coding
2nd
Coding
3rd
Coding
        Rumor 0.77 0.84 0.63 0.71 0.79 0.75 0.80 0.89
        Anxiety 0.81 0.82 0.85 0.85 0.82 0.73 0.80 0.86
        Personal Involvement 0.89 1.00 0.63 0.85 0.83 0.64 0.71 0.96
        Source Ambiguity 0.75 0.86 0.63 0.82 0.74 0.59 0.71 0.92
        Content Ambiguity 0.74 0.81 0.77 1.00 0.85 0.59 0.83 0.94
        Social Ties 0.79 0.99 0.48 0.79 0.89 0.64 0.77 1.0
        Sample Size 100 300 100 100 300 100 100 300
Table 2.  Spearman’s Correlations
Mumbai Terror Attacks 2008
     Rumor Anxiety Sorc Amb Cont Amb Per Inv Soc Tie
 Rumor 1
  Anxiety .182** 1
   Sorc Amb .358** .291** 1
    Cont Amb .047** .074** .179** 1
     Per Inv .239** .328** .360** -0.01 1
      Social Tie -.189** 0.012 0.011 .108** -.038* 1
Toyota Recalls 2010
     Rumor Anxiety Sorc Amb Cont Amb Per Inv Soc Tie
 Rumor 1
  Anxiety .050** 1
   Sorc Amb .301** 0.012 1
    Cont Amb 0.021 .083** -0.021 1
     Per Inv .060** .259** -0.005 .189** 1
      Social Tie 0.03 .156** 0.016 .041* .228** 1
Seattle Shootings 2012
     Rumor Anxiety Sorc Amb Cont Amb Per Inv Soc Tie
 Rumor 1
  Anxiety .164** 1
   Sorc Amb .280** .378** 1
    Cont Amb .045** .162** .180** 1
     Per Inv .142** .455** .275** .078** 1
      Social Tie 0.005 -0.004 .055** .044** -0.015 1
**Indicates correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
*Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
Abbreviations:  Sorc Amb - Source Ambiguity; Cont Amb - Content Ambiguity; Per Inv - Personal Involvement; Soc Tie - Social Ties
 416 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
between the dependent and independent variables, and inde-
pendent variables need not be interval, nor normally distri-
buted, nor linearly related (Tabachnick and Fidell 1996).
Further, the results have direct interpretations as odds-ratios.
The Spearman rank correlation test (Table 2) indicates that all
correlations are less than 0.5, indicating that no significant
multicollinearity problems exist (Kishore et al. 2004-2005). 
Also, the correlation between rumor and source ambiguity is
not in the range of statistical concern (.358 for the Mumbai
terrorist attacks, .301 for the Toyota recall, and .280 for the
Seattle shooting incident).  Note that the Twitter data are
observable and explicit (as opposed to latent) that community
members actually tweeted during the situation of social crises.
We also ensure that our sample sizes (3,500 tweets from each
crisis incident) are large enough to suppress the potential
Type I and Type II errors.  The concern of Type II errors can
be suppressed with a large sample size, and the immunity of
Type I error can be ensured by the significance of p-value
(Larson-Hall 2010).
The rumor model tested is as follows:
P(Rumor) . Anxiety + Source Ambiguity + Content
Ambituity + Personal Involvement + Direct Message
As our Twitter data sets were collected over specific time
periods, we performed Durbin-Watson tests to verify that the
error terms in our data sets did not contain any first order
autocorrelations.  (Durbin and Watson 1951; Savin and White
1977).  Values of the Durbin-Watson statistics (d) were 1.94,
1.96, and 1.99 at p < .05 for each of the three data sets
(Mumbai, Toyota, and Seattle).  As all of these values are
between lower (dU = 1.93) and upper (4 – dU = 2.07) bound of
critical values at p < .05, we do not detect any autocorrela-
tions between the error terms, validating that the error terms
are independent of each other (Murray 2005).8
Results
Using logistic regression analysis, we estimated the proba-
bility of rumor-mongering for the five independent variables
during the three different types of crisis incidents.  Results of
the regression analysis are presented in Table 3.  The results
indicate a good model fit for the Mumbai terrorist attacks
data,  χ² =  680.21 (p < .001), for the Toyota recall data,  χ² =
260.94 (p < .001), and for the Seattle shooting incident data, 
χ² = 292.69  (p < .001).  Table 3 also shows that H1 is sup-
ported for the Mumbai terror case at the significance level of
p < .01, and for the Seattle shooting incident case at the
significance level of p < .05.  However, H1 is only marginally
supported for the Toyota recall data at p < .10.  This implies
that, during the Mumbai terrorist attacks, a Twitter message
charged with anxiety is 1.406 times more likely to be a rumor
than an anxiety-free message.  In the Seattle shooting inci-
dent, the probability of an anxious Twitter message to be a
rumor is 1.299 times higher than a non-anxious one.  In the
Toyota recalls, although the probability that an anxious
Twitter message is likely to be a rumor is 1.59 times higher
than a non-anxious one, its significance level is marginal at
p < .1.
Table 3 shows significant effects of source ambiguity on
rumor at p < .01 for all three crisis cases, leading to strong
support for H2a.  In other words, the probability that a Twitter
message with an ambiguous source is likely to be a rumor is
4.237 times, 4.523 times, and 4.001 times higher than a
Twitter message having source information for the cases of
the Mumbai terrorist attacks, the Toyota recall, and the Seattle
shooting, respectively.  Table 3 also shows the significant
effects of personal involvement on rumor for all three crisis
cases but with slightly different significance levels.  The
probability that a message implying a feeling of personal
involvement is likely to be a rumor is 1.699 times (p < .01), 
2.15  times (p < .01), and 1.401 times  (p < .05) higher than a
message that does not imply a feeling of personal involvement
for different cases, supporting H3.
A comparison of the coefficient values for each independent
variable of the three supported hypotheses (H1, H2a, and H3)
shows consistent patterns.  In other words, all three different
cases of social crises show that source ambiguity is the most
important, personal involvement is next in importance, and
anxiety is the least yet marginally important rumor causing
factor.  However, different from our expectation, we could not
find effects of content ambiguity and social tie on rumor.
Therefore, H2b and H4 are not supported.
8To test for the independence of error terms in the logistic regression model,
a first order autocorrelation test was performed.  The Durbin-Watson test and
the resulting d-statistic are used to perform this test.  If the d-statistic value
is between lower and upper bound critical values (dU) and 4 – dU at p < .05,
then no autocorrelation exists in the data set.  If the d-statistic value is less
than the lower bound critical value (dL) at p < .05, then it confirms that
positive autocorrelation exists in the data set.  If the d-statistic value is greater
than 4 – dL, then it indicates that negative autocorrelation exists in the data
set.  All d-statistic values in our data sets (1.94, 1.96, 1.99) were between the
lower (dU = 1.93) and upper (4 – dU = 2.07) bound critical values, which
indicate that error terms in our data sets are independent of each other
(Murray 2005).
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 417

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Table 3.  Results for the Independent Effects on Rumor (95% CI for Exp(b))
 
  Mumbai Terror 2008 Toyota Recall 2010 Seattle Shooting 2012
        HypothesisB(SE) Sig. Exp(B) B(SE) Sig. Exp(B) B(SE) Sig. Exp(B)
   Constant -1.364(.066) 0.000 .256
-1.799
  (.078) 0.000 .165
-2.323
  (0.079) 0.000 0.098
   Anxiety .341(.096) 0.000 1.406***
.464
  (.257) .071 1.59*
.262
  (.123) 0.033 1.299**
H1:  Partially
Supported
Source
Ambiguity
1.444
  (.086) 0.000 4.237***
1.509
  (.088) 0.000 4.523***
1.387
  (.103) 0.000 4.001***
H2a: 
Supported
Content
Ambiguity
.1
  (.108) 0.357 1.105
.194
  (.201) .337 1.214
-.104
   (.19) 0.586 0.902 H2b:  Rejected
Personal
Involvement
.53
  (.09) 0.000 1.699***
.766
  (.28) .006 2.151***
.337
   (.149) .0204 1.401** H3:  Supported
   Social Tie -1.114(.093) 0.000 .328
.142
  (.284) .619 1.152
-.114
   (.284) 0.687 0.892 H4:  Rejected
   Model Fit  = 680.21, df =5 (p < .001)  = 260.94, df = 5 (p < .001)  = 292.69, df = 5 (p < .001)
***Significant at the 0.01 level.  **Significant at the .05 level.  *Significant at the .10 level.
Discussion
Key Findings
The results of logistic regression indicate that, while content
ambiguity does not contribute to rumormongering, source
ambiguity does so very significantly.  This result needs con-
textual interpretation from the view of collective communi-
cation behavior in virtual space during social crises.
Twitter messages coded for content ambiguity were mainly
composed of questions seeking information on the crisis
situation or doubts expressing suspicion on Twitter posts.9
Questioning or doubtful statements explicitly display the
subjective nature of the messages.  The tone of the messages
signals that they were not persuasive statements intended to
make others believe and spread the received messages.  As a
result, contrary to H2b, the content ambiguity variable turned
out to be a nonsignificant rumormongering factor.  In contrast,
messages in the category of source ambiguity frequently
resembled third-person situation reports without sources being
attached.10  In their postures, these statements looked like
news reports, but without clear source, data, or context
described.  This might have influenced their role as a rumor-
mongering factor.
The nonsignificant effect of content ambiguity and the highly
significant effect of source ambiguity on rumormongering
highlights the nature of citizen-centric social reporting behav-
ior under crises.  As rumor studies tell, it is a spontaneous
collective information processing behavior “to make sense of
an unclear situation or to deal with a possible threat”
(DiFonzo and Bordia 2007, p. 771).  However, given that col-
lective information diffusion and processing essentially go
parallel with the collective sense-making process in the
Twitter space, citizen reporting cannot lead to successful
sense making without a sufficient number of messages being
supported with trusted sources.  This means that, unlike the
mainstream media where professional reporters check infor-
mation sources before publication, the shortage of reliable
information in the social media space may be more likely to
lead to questions seeking information, doubts expressing
suspicions, subjective interpretations, or rumors.
Another important finding is that, contrary to the traditional
rumor research in the offline context, the results in Table 3
show that the effect size of anxiety on rumoring is much
lower than that of source ambiguity.  As Rosnow’s (1991)
meta-analytic exploration of rumor studies shows, traditional
rumor researchers have consistently reported that anxiety is
normally the most influential rumormongering factor.  How-
ever, in our case, the influence of anxiety (ranging from 1.299
to 1.59 in its coefficient values) on rumor was much lower
than that of source ambiguity (ranging from 4.001 to 4.523 in
its coefficient values).
9For example, “Fact or fiction?  Indian gov't trying to stop tweets about
Mumbai?” (from the Mumbai terrorist attacks data), or “How does this make
sense? Suspect [in] downtown was blond and suspect on Roosevelt was
brown haired?” (from the Seattle shooting incident Twitter data).
10“#mumbai The terrorist attacked a hospital for women and children and
took patients hostage” (from the Mumbai terrorist attack data); “Toyota
Moving Forward With Recall, Multiple Factories Closed” (from the Toyota
recall data).
 418 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
This reversed influence can be described by the characteristics
of social relations and their attendant communication patterns,
which are propelled by different modes of community.
Traditional rumor studies have been built upon the idea of
territorial community.  That is, as triggers of rumor transmis-
sion, rumor theory has maintained that social crises cause
collective anxiety and ambiguous situations, which are com-
monly experienced by people living in the adjacent territorial
boundary of the crisis stricken community (Allport and
Postman 1947; Festinger 1962; Shibutani 1966).  Therefore,
when rumor theorists argue that rumors tend to “avoid
crossing social barriers and therefore have a restricted
circulation” (Allport and Postman 1947, p. 35) or it cannot
travel without social support (Festinger 1962), they assume a
territorial community in close proximity, which is somehow
sustained by repeated social relations, some level of affective
trust, and enduring shared values.  Therefore, the tightly knit
territorial community is likely to impose social influences to
accept the received message without checking facts or the
source of the ambiguous information (Garrett 2011).  That
means, people tend to trust information they receive from
those they know, and replace with affective trust their dis-
belief in the received information, even when its source is
ambiguous.  Therefore, in the traditional territorial community
supported by affective trust and preexisting social relations,
shared anxiety may have been the more important rumor-
causing factor, compared to source ambiguity.
However, communication through the virtual space of Twitter
has very different characteristics in terms of social relations
and communication modes especially under social crises.  As
Twitter communications are rapidly improvised in response
to the social crises, territorial community boundary, pre-
existing social ties, social influence, shared anxiety, and
affective trust may be very weak or even almost absent.  It is
highly likely that (1) Twitter communication on the Mumbai
terrorist attacks was improvised at the national level,
(2) Twitter communication on the Seattle shooting incident
was mainly made at the Seattle community level, and
(3) Twitter communication on the Toyota recall case may not
even imply any traits of traditional territorial community. 
Instead, they might have gathered on Twitter with temporary
crisis issues to seek and share information on the unfolding
crisis situations.  Therefore, compared to the territorial com-
munity, the virtual Twitter space might have been an impro-
vised, loose community where social relations are weak,
affective trust is low, and hence little social pressure to accept
ambiguous information.  In other words, as the Twitter com-
munity has weaker social pressures, Twitter users do not
easily accept dubious reports with ambiguous sources.  A few
exemplary tweet messages that express distrust for unreliable
information are as follows:
“wish that people wouldn’t clutter @mumbai with
stupid speculation and half-baked opinions” (from
Mumbai terrorist attack data).
“I’m seeing conflicting information about how many
are dead from #RooseveltShooting – is it 2,3, or 4?
Male or female?” (from Seattle shooting incident
data).
“Is it true that the Lexus engine will explode?  Who
said that?” (from Toyota recall data).
However, although aspects of the virtual community are
dominant in Twitter, it does not necessarily mean that terri-
torial traces are completely erased in a virtual community.
The traces of territorial community are represented in the
personal involvement statements11 in that those statements
may have been posted by Twitter users who were in close
proximity to the physical location of Mumbai or Seattle.12
However, the fact that the effect of personal involvement on
rumor (from 1.401 to 2.151) is much lower than that of source
ambiguity (from 4.001 to 4.532) shows that, in aggregate, the
Twitter space is dominated by the virtual characteristics of
online community.
As to social ties, which were measured by directed messages,
we could not find its effect on rumors, hence H4 is rejected. 
According to our close reading of directed messages, the main
reason for the insignificance of H4 is that online users used
directed messages primarily to ask about personal safety,
share anxious feelings with their acquaintances, and for short
chats.  It was very rare to use directed messages for situational
information gathering and dissemination, hence they did not
lead to rumor dissemination.
Finally, it is noteworthy to mention the result of descriptive
statistics in Table 4.  First, the very low frequency of anxiety
in the Toyota recall data (2.20%), compared to that of the
Mumbai terrorist attacks (22.35%) and the Seattle shooting
incident (16.03%), confirms the insights of early rumor
researchers that community crises (like war, terrorist attack,
or natural disaster) involve high levels of anxiety at the
community level (Allport et al. 1947; Oh et al. 2011; Oh et al.
11“hearing navy sounds at the helipad near my house …” (from Mumbai
terrorist attack data); “Dueling helicopters above our house.  Shooting sus-
pect was shot and killed.  Which shooting is  unknown.  #downtownshooting
#rooseveltshooting” (from Seattle shooting incident data).
12Our appreciation goes to an anonymous reviewer who suggested the
personal involvement variable.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 419

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Table 4.  Frequency and Percentage of Each Variable of Different Social Crises
  Mumbai Terror 2008 Toyota Recall 2010 Seattle Shooting 2012
  Frequency (%) Percent Frequency (%) Percent Frequency (%) Percent
   Rumor 1211 (34.61%) 1133 (32.38%) 649 (18.54%)
   Anxiety 782 (22.35%) 77 (2.20%) 561 (16.03%)
   Source Ambiguity 1670 (47.73%) 2136 (61.05%) 1512 (43.20%)
   Content Ambiguity 537 (15.35%) 131 (3.74%) 163 (4.66%)
   Personal Involvement 987 (28.21%) 69 (1.97%) 298 (8.51%)
   Social Ties 1112 (31.78%) 63 (1.80%) 86 (2.46%)
   Sample Size 3,500 3,500 3,500
2010; Rosnow et al. 1976; Shibutani 1966).  Given that the
Toyota recall case is more about a business crisis that is not
attached to a physical community, it is understandable that the
frequency of anxiety is very low (2.2%), and the effect of
anxiety on rumor is only marginal at p < .1, but the effect of
source ambiguity on rumor is very high at p < .01.  It implies
that, different from other community crisis situations, rumors
under business crisis tend to be driven primarily by informa-
tion problems and very marginally by collective anxiety.  We
can infer this reason from the fact that, while citizens facing
the Toyota recalls have alternatives of not purchasing or not
using the Toyota products, community crises like the Mumbai
terrorist attacks and the Seattle shooting incident do not offer
alternatives for citizens other than fleeing their communities.
In addition, relative to the Toyota recall data (1.97%), the
higher frequency of personal involvement in the cases of the
Mumbai terrorist attacks (28.21%) and the Seattle shooting
incident (8.51%) reveals that community disasters are more
likely to exert direct effects on community members to con-
sider them as personal problems.  For the same reason, it is no
wonder that the frequency of anxiety is lowest in the business
crisis of the Toyota recall case.
Comparison of the two different community crises of the
Mumbai terrorist attacks and the Seattle shooting incident
show different patterns of communication.  The frequencies
of all variables (rumor, source ambiguity, personal involve-
ment, anxiety, content ambiguity, and social ties) in the large-
scale Mumbai terrorist attacks are consistently higher than the
corresponding frequencies in the local scale of the Seattle
shooting incident.  As detailed in the previous section on the
backgrounds of the three crises, the different frequencies
reflect the differences in scales and impacts of the two com-
munity crises.
Theoretical Contributions
By extending the traditional rumor theory to the social media
context, we identified key variables (source ambiguity, per-
sonal involvement, and anxiety) that explain rumor dissemin-
on Twitter during diverse crisis events:  the Mumbai terrorist
attacks, the Seattle shooting incident, and the Toyota recalls.
The findings of our study reveal interesting patterns of collec-
tive information processing, similar to those observed in
offline contexts in prior research, yet with different modes,
scale, and implications.  This result is contrary to findings of
traditional rumor research in which anxiety is normally con-
sidered the most influential factor in rumor spread.  To ex-
plain the changed order of influences on rumors in the Twitter
space, we contrasted two different types of community:  a
tightly knit territorial community and an improvised virtual
community for temporal emergency situations. Our interpre-
tation is that, while the traditional territorial community
replaces disbelief with affective trust for the ambiguous infor-
mation, the improvised virtual community executes cognitive
distrust for ambiguous information to understand uncertain
situations and to reduce cognitive ambiguity.  Also, the des-
criptive statistics in Table 4 confirmed that, while information
of ambiguous provenance is a general rumor causing factor
across business and community crises, the business crisis of
the Toyota recalls show much lower levels of anxiety than the
other two community crises in their collective reporting.
Practical Contributions
Many rumor researchers have warned that, unless properly
managed, negative rumors can decrease morale and increase
 420 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
distrust in the capacity of the organization and government to
protect their customers and citizens (Allport and Postman
1947; Rosnow and Fine 1976).  Symptoms of these dele-
terious effects were actually visible in our data set as well:
“from karmayog #mumbai We are witnessing a lack
of leadership from elected or appointed public
representatives, bureaucrats, spiritual leader” (from
the Mumbai terrorist attack data).
“The mayor of #Seattle is a complete idiot.  Guns
don't kill people, people kill people.#fb” (from the
Seattle shooting incident data).
“Dear Toyota, it would be easier to let us know
which cars we can keep as it seems like almost all of
them has been recalled” (from the Toyota recall
data).
As Rosnow (1991) suggests, one important task for crisis
response is to control rumors and obtain and distribute local
and reliable information to the affected community as early as
possible.   The fact that source ambiguity is the most impor-
tant rumor-causing factor across business and community
crises provides an important implication for such responses. 
Under crisis situations, if there are too many situation reports
with ambiguous or no information source, then we can
surmise that rumor mills are being constructed.  It may be a
strong signal that people are desperately searching and
sharing situational information through their social networks
but without reliable information from authoritative sources.
We believe that emergency response teams, in firms or
governments, need to understand the crisis communication
patterns and rumormongering conditions.  The descriptive
statistics in Table 4 indicate that the low frequency of anxiety
(2.20%) and high frequency of source ambiguity (32.38%) in
the Toyota recall suggests that firms in a business crisis
should pay attention to information issues to control rumor
dissemination.   In contrast, in cases of community disasters,
emergency responders need to make extra efforts to distribute
reliable information and, at the same time, control collective
anxiety in the community to suppress rumor spread.  That
means, if unambiguous and localized situational information
is not provided to the affected community in a timely manner,
their collective information processing is very likely to
encourage rumors.  Therefore, emergency response teams
need to put in place prompt response systems to refute the
wrong information and provide citizens with timely, localized,
and correct information through multiple communication
channels such as website links, social network websites, RSS,
e-mail, text message, radio, TV, or Retweets.  In fact, given
that the motivation of rumoring is fundamentally to deal with
a possible threat (DiFonzo and Bordia 2007), provision of
timely and certain information may lead to successful threat
management in partnership with voluntary online citizens.
Future Research and Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first appli-
cation of rumor theory to social media and community
intelligence.  As a result, our suggested model needs replica-
tion and refinement in different social media contexts.
Further, as we coded all variables as binary data types, there
could be information loss during coding and analysis.  It was,
however, an inevitable choice in the situation that coders
should manually read and code all data of tweet texts for all
variables.  To overcome this limitation, development and use
of richer measurement scales for all variables would be
beneficial.  Future studies can combine archival data of social
media with survey response data of online users who are
involved in social reporting under different crisis situations.
As the former national incident commander, Thad Allen,
testified, it is almost certain that “there will never be a major
disaster that won’t involve public participation” (Berinato
2010, p. 78).  This offers many opportunities for the IS com-
munity to contribute in solving crisis problems in business
and society.  Among many, we suggest two promising
research opportunities.
First, unlike human response in traditional business contexts,
much human response during crises is reflexive.  Therefore,
evidence from prior extreme events should be used to guide
interventions and agency response during social crises.  In the
past, such research has been hampered by the lack of proxi-
mate data from social crises.  However, the introduction of
Twitter and other social media services has provided
researchers with a precious window of data on information
processing by concerned respondents, usually in the imme-
diate aftermath of crisis incidents.  In this regard, analysis of
social media data on social crises will offer invaluable insight
to enhance individual and institutional capability to monitor
and identify threats, needs, and opportunities to solve many
crisis problems.
Second, although many pundits have portrayed rosy pictures
about the potential of online crowds for collaborative problem
solving (Kazman and Chen 2009; Surowiecki 2005; Tapscott
and Williams 2006), less attention has been paid to the infor-
mation quality issues in the context of citizen-centric social
media technologies.  However, given that information quality
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 421

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
and the perceived trust on online information are critical
success factors for e-commerce (Gefen et al. 2008) and infor-
mation systems (DeLone and McLean 2003), the quality of
social information produced by a multitude of social media
users is likely to determine the success of collaborative prob-
lem solving by the voluntary online public, especially under
social crisis situations.  This study will be a good starting
point to understand the issue of social information quality.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the senior editor, associate editor,
and the review team for their encouragement.  We thank the referees
for comments that have greatly improved the lucidity of the paper.
We are also indebted to Stefan Stieglitz and Nina Krüger for making
available the Toyota data set.  We also thank the following for
research assistance during the course of this study:  Sahana Aranha,
Sandesh Badarayani, Chris Bang, Masuma Dinani, Sathyanarayanan
Gopalakrishnan, Shruti Jain, Yuvaraj Kondaswamy, Wen Luo,
Himanshu Maheshwari, Srikanth Parameswaran, Shama Pillai,
Lavanya Rao, Harish Shankara, Srikanth Venkatesan, Clayton
Whitelaw, and Jinsoo Yeo.  Finally, we also express our deep grati-
tude to Larry Brandt who set us off on this path.  We acknowledge
the National Science Foundation (NSF) for supporting this research
in part through awards IIS 0926376, 0916612, 1134853 and
1227353.  The usual NSF disclaimer applies.  For this research, the
last (corresponding) author was also supported by the World Class
University program funded by the Ministry of Education, Science,
and Technology through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(R31-20002) and by the Sogang University Research Grant of 2011.
We would like to dedicate this paper to all those who lost their lives
in the 2008 Mumbai terrorist incident and the Seattle shooting
incident of 2012.
References
Allen, K., and Sturcke, J.  2010.  “Timeline:  Toyota’s Recall
Woes,” The Guardian, February 23 (http://www.guardian.co.uk/
business/2010/jan/29/timeline-toyota-recall-accelerator-pedal;
accessed September 17, 2012).
Allport, G. W., and Postman, L.  1947.  The Psychology of Rumor,
New York:  Henry Holt and Company.
Anthony, S.  1973.  “Anxiety and Rumor,” The Journal of Social
Psychology (89), pp. 91-98.
Berinato, S.  2010.  “You Have to Lead from Everywhere:  An
Interview with Admiral Thad Allen, USCG (Ret.),” Harvard
Business Review (88:11), pp. 76-79.
Bharosa, N., Janssen, M., Rao, H. R., and Lee, J.  2008.  “Adaptive
Information Orchestration:  Architectural Principles Improving
Information Quality,” in Proceedings of the 5th International
ISCRAM Conference, Washington, DC, pp. 556-565.
Bharosa, N., Lee, J., and Janssen, M.  2010.  “Challenges and
Obstacles in Sharing and Coordinating Information during Multi-
Agency Disaster Response:  Propositions from Field Exercises,”
Information Systems Frontiers (12:1), pp. 49-65.
Bordia, P.  1996.  Rumor Interaction Patterns on Computer-
Mediated Communication Networks, unpublished Ph.D disser-
tation, Psychology Department, The Temple University.
Bordia, P., and DiFonzo, N.  1999.  “Rumor as Group Problem
Solving:  Development Patterns in Informal Computer-Mediated
Groups,” Small Research Group (30:8), pp. 8-28.
Bordia, P., and DiFonzo, N.  2004.  “Problem Solving in Social
Interactions on the Internet:  Rumor as Social Cognition,” Social
Psychology Quarterly (67:1), pp. 33-49.
Buckner, H. T.  1965.  “A Theory of Rumor Transmission,” The
Public Opinion Quarterly (29:1), pp. 54-70.
Chakraborty, R., Agrawal, M., and Rao, H. R.  2010.  “An
Exploratory Study of Information Processing Under Stress:  The
Case of Mumbai Police Control and First Responders during
Terrorist Attacks of November 26, 2008,” paper presented at the
Pre-ICIS ISGSEC Workshop on Information Security and
Proviacy, St.  Louis, Missouri, December 12.
CNN.  2012.  “Police:  ‘Hero’ Saved Several Seattle Café Patrons as
Gunman Opended Fire,” May 31 (http://articles.cnn.com/2012-
05-31/us/us_washington-cafe-shooting_1_police-chief-jim-pugel-
shooting-gunman?_s=PM:US; accessed September 17, 2012).
Collins, H. M.  2001.  “Tacit Knowledge, Trust and the Q of
Sapphire,” Social Studies of Science (31:1), pp. 71-85.
DeLone, W., and McLean E. R.  2003.  “The DeLone and McLean
Model of Information Systems Success:  A Ten-Year Update,”
Journal of Management Information Systems (19:4), pp. 9-30.
DiFonzo, N., and Bordia, P.  2007.  “Rumor Transmission,” in
Encyclopedia of Social Psychology, R. F. Baumeister and K. D.
Vohs (eds.), Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage Publications.
Durbin, J., and Watson, G. S.  1951.  “Testing for Serial Correlation
in Least Squares Regression.  II,” Biometrika Trust (38:1), pp.
159-177.
Festinger, L.  1957 A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, Stanford,
CA:  Stanford University Press.
Field, A.  2005.   Discovering Statistics Using SPSS, London:  Sage
Publications.
Gahran, A.  2008.  “Tracking a Rumor:  Indian Government,
Twitter, and Common Sense.,” Amy Gahran’s Blog, November
27 (http://www.contentious.com/2008/11/27/tracking-a-rumor-
indian-government-twitter-and-common-sens/; accessed Sep-
tember 16, 2012).
Garrett, R. K.  2011.  “Troubling Consequences of Online Political
Rumoring,” Human Communication Research (37), pp. 255-274.
Gefen, D., Benbasat, I., and Pavlou, P. A.  2008.  “A Research
Agenda for Turst in Online Environment,” Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems (24:4), pp. 275-286.
Indian Ministry of External Affairs.  2009.  “Mumbai Terror Attack:
Dossier of Evidence,” (http://www.investigativeproject.org/
documents/misc/277.pdf; accessed September 16, 2012).
Janssen, M., Lee, J., Bharosa, N., and Cresswell, A.  2010.
“Advances in Multi-Agency Disaster Management:  Key Ele-
ments in Disaster Research,” Information Systems Frontiers
(12:1), pp. 1-7.
Jenvald, J., Morin, M., and Kincaid, J. P.  2001.  “A Framework for
Web-Based Dissemination of Models and Lessons Learned from
Emergency-Response Exercises and Operations,” International
Journal of Emergency Management (1:1), pp. 82-94.
 422 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Johnson, G.  2012.  “Seattle Gunman Kills 5, Injures 1 Before
Shooting Self to Death,” Huffington Post, May 31 (http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/2012/05/30/seattle-shootings-leave-
4_n_1556911.html; accessed September 16, 2012).
Kapferer, J.-N.  1990.  Rumors:  Uses, Interpretations, and Images,
New Brunswick, NJ:  Transaction Publishers.
Kazman, R., and Chen, H. M.  2009.  “The Metropolis Model:  A
New Logic for Development of Crowd-Sourced Systems,” Com-
munications of the ACM (52:7), pp. 78-84.
Kendra, J. M., and Wachtendorg, T.  2003.  “Elements of Resilience
After the World Trade Center Disaster:  Reconstituting New
York City’s Emergency Operation Centre,” Disasters (27:1), pp.
37-53.
Kishore, R., Agrawal, M., and Rao, H. R.  2004-2005.  “Deter-
minants of Sourcing During Techonology and Maturity:  An
Empirical Study of E-Commerce Sourcing,” Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems (21:3), pp. 47-82.
Knapp, R. H.  1944.  “A Psychology of Rumor,” Public Online
Quarterly (8), pp. 22-27.
Knopf, T. A.  1975.  Rumor, Race and Riots, New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction Books.
Krippendorf, K.  1980.  Content Analysis:  An Introduction of its
Methodology, Thousand Oaks, CA:  Sage Publications.
Landis, J. R., and Koch, G. G.  1977.  “The Measurement of
Observer Agreement for Categorical Data,” Biometrics (33), pp.
159-174.
Larson-Hall, J.  2010.  “Chapter 4:  Changing the Way We Do
Statistics:  Hypothesis Testing,  Power, Effect Size, and Other
Misunderstood Issues,” A Guide to Doing Statistics Research
Using SPSS, New York:  Routledge, pp. 96-125.
Leberecht, T.  2010.  “Twitter Grows Up in Aftermath of Haiti
Earthquake,” CNET News, January 19 (http://news.cnet.com/
8301-13641_3-10436435-44.html).
Li, J., and Rao, H. R.  2010.  “Twitter as a Rapid Response News
Service:  An Exploration in the Context of the 2008 China Earth-
quake,” Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing
Countries (42), pp. 1-22.
Majchrzak, A., Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Hollingshead, A. B.  2007.
“Coordinating Expertise Among Emergent Groups Responding
to Disasters,” Organization Science (18:1), pp, 147-161.
McNerthney, C.  2012.  “Shooting Suspect Visited Bar Before; Gave
Off a ‘Bad Vibe’,” Seattle PI, May 31  (http://www.seattlepi.
com/local/article/Seattle-shooting-two-killed-three-wounded-
3595992.php#ixzz1wTdZntvJ; accessed September 17, 2012).
McPhail, C.  1991.  “Challenging the Myth:  Sherif, Turner and
Killian,” in The Myth of the Madding Crowd, New York:  Walter
de Gruyter Inc., pp. 61-103.
Metaxas, P. T., and Mustafaraj, E.  2010.  “From Obscurity to
Prominence in Minutes:  Political Speech and Real-Time
Search,” in Proceedings of the WebSci 10:  Extending the Fron-
tiers of Society On-Line, Raleigh, NC, April 26-27.
Mileti, D. S., and Darlington, J. D.  1997.  “The Role of Searching
in Shaping Reactions to Earthquake Risk Information,” Social
Problems (44:1), pp. 89-103.
Mills, A., Chen, R., Lee, J., and Rao, H. R.  2009.  “Web 2.0 Emer-
gency Applications:  How Useful Can Twitter Be,” Journal of
Information Privacy and Security (5:3), pp. 3-26.
Murray, M. P.  2005.  Econometrics:  A Modern Introduction (1st
ed.), Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice Hall.
Oh, O., Agrawal, M., and Rao, H. R.  2011.  “Information Control
and Terrorism:  Tracking the Mumbai Terrorist Attack through
Twitter,” Information Systems Frontier (13), pp. 33-44.
Oh, O., Kwon, K. H., and Rao, H. R.  2010.  “An Exploration of
Social Media in Extreme Events:  Rumor Theory and Twitter
during the Haiti Earthquake 2010,” in Proceedings of the 31st
International Conference on Information Systems, Saint Louis,
MO, December 12-15.
Palen, L., Anderson, K. M., Mark, G., Martin, J., Sicker, D.,
Palmer, M., and Grunwald, D.  2010.  “A Vision for Technology-
Mediated Support for Public Participation & Assistance in Mass
Emergencies & Disasters,” in Proceedings of ACM-BCS Visions
of Computer Science 2010, The University of Edinburgh, UK,
April 14-16, pp. 1-12.
Palen, L., Vieweg, S., Liu, S. B., and Hughes, A. L.  2009.  “Crisis
in a Networked World Features of Computer-Mediated Com-
munication in the April 16, 2007, Virginia Tech Event,” Social
Science Computer Review (27:5), pp. 1-14.
Prasad, J.  1935.  “The Psychology of Rumor:  A Study Relating to
the Great Indian Earthquake of 1934,” British Journal of
Psychology (41), pp. 129-144.
Prasad, J.  1950.  “A Comparative Study of Rumours and Reports in
Different Earthquakes,” British Journal of Psychology (41), pp.
129-144.
Quarantelli, E. L., and Wenger, D.  1989.  “A Cross-Societal Com-
parison of Disaster News Reporting in Japan and the United
States,” Preliminary Paper #142, Disaster Research Center,
University of Delaware.
Raman, B.  2009.  “Mumbai Terrorist Attack:  Some Aspects,”
Raman’s Terrorism Analysis, January 13 (http://
ramansterrorismanalysis.blogspot.com/2009/01/mumbai-terrorist-
attack-some-aspects.html; accessed September 16, 2012).
Reuters.  2010.  “Toyota Recalling Over 416,000 Cars in U.S.,
Canada,” Reuters, July 29 (http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/
07/29/us-toyota-recall-idUSTRE66S1KR20100729; accessed
September 16, 2012).
Rosnow, R. L.  1991.  “Inside Rumor:  A Personal Journey,” Ameri-
can Psychologist (46:5 ), pp. 484-496.
Rosnow, R. L., Esposito, J. L., and Gibney, L.  1988.  “Factors
Influencing Rumor Spreading:  Replication and Extension,”
Language and Communication (8), pp. 29-42.
Rosnow, R. L., and Fine, G. A.  1976.  Rumor and Gossip:  The
Social Psychology of Hearsay, New York:  Elsevier Inc.
Rosnow, R. L., and Kimmel, A. J.  2000.  “Rumor,” in  Encyclo-
pedia of Psychology, A. E. Kazdin (ed.), New York:  Oxford
University Press and American Psychology Association, pp.
122-123.
Runyan, R. C.  2006.  “Small Business in the Face of Crisis:  Iden-
tifying Barriers to Recovery from a Natural Disaster,” Journal of
Contingencies and Crisis Management (14:1), pp. 12-26.
Savin, N. E., and White, K. J.  1977.  “The Durbin-Watson Test for
Serial Correlation with Extreme Sample Sizes or Many
Regressors,” Econometrica (45:8), pp. 1989-1996.
Scanlon, J.  2007.  “Convergence Unlimited:  Overloaded Call
Centers and the Indian Ocean Tsunami,” International Journal of
Emergency Management (4:2), pp. 211-238.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 423

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Shibutani, T.  1966.  Improvised News:  A Sociological Study of
Rumor, Indianapolis, IN:  The Bobbs-Merrill Company Inc.
Shklovski, I., Burke, M., Kiesler, S., and Kraut, R.  2010.  “Tech-
nology Adoption and Us in the Aftermath of Hurricane Katrina
in New Orleans,” American Behavioral Scientist (53:8), pp.
1128-1246.
Shklovski, I., Palen, L., and Sutton, J.  2008.  “Finding Community
Through Information and Communication Technology During
Disaster Events,” in Proceedings of 2008 ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, San Diego, CA,
November 8-12, pp. 127-136.
Singh, P., Singh, P., Park, I., Lee, J., and Rao, H. R.  2009.  “Infor-
mation Sharing:  A Study of Information Attributes and Their
Relative Significance During Catastrophic Events,” Cyber-
Security and Global Information Assurance:  Threat Analysis and
Response Solutions, K. J. Knapp (ed.), Hershey, PA:  IGI Global.
Stallings, R. A., and Quarantelli, E. L.  1985.  “Emergent Citizen
Groups and Emergent Management,” Public Administration
Review (45), pp. 93-100.
Starbird, K., and Palen, L.  2010.  “Pass It On?  Retweeting in Mass
Emergency,” in Proceedings of the 7th International ISCRAM
Conference, Seattle, WA, May 2-5.
Stieglitz, S., and Krüger, N.  2011.  “Analysis of Sentiments in
Corporate Twitter Communication – A Case Study on an Issue of
Toyota,” in Proceedings of 22nd Australian Conference on Infor-
mation Systems, Sydney, Australia, November 30-December 2.
Sutton, J., Palen, L., and Shklovski, I.  2008.  “Backchannels on the
Front Lines:  Emergent Uses of Social Media in the 2007
Southern California Wildfires,” in Proceedings of 5th
International ISCRAM Conference, Washington, D.C.
Surowiecki, J.  2005.  The Wisdom of Crowds, New York: 
Doubleday.
Tabachnick, B.G. and Fidell, L.S. 1996.  Using Multivariate Statis-
tics, New York:  HarperCollins
Tapscott, D., and Williams, A. D.  2006.  Wikinomics:  How Mass
Collaboration Changes Everything, New York:  Penguin Group.
Tasi, W., and Ghoshal, S.  1998.  “Social Capital and Value Crea-
tion:  The Role of Intrafirm Networks,” The Academy of
Management Journal (41:4), pp. 464-476.
Tierney, K. J., and Aguirre, B. E.  2001.  “Testing Shibutani’s
Prediction of Information Seeking Behavior in Rumor,” Pre-
liminary Paper #307, Disaster Research Center, University of
Delaware.
Wasserman, T.  2011.  “How Toyota Used Social Media to ‘Digg’
Itself Out of a PR Nightmare,” Mashable Social Media, Sep-
tember 1 (http://mashable.com/2011/09/01/toyota-digg-recalls/;
accessed September 17, 2012).
Wenger, D., and Friedman, B.  1986.  “Local and National Media
Coverage of Disasters:  A Content Analysis of the Print Media’s
Treatment of Disasters Myths,” Journal of Mass Emergencies
and Disasters (4:3), pp. 27-50.
Winter, M.  2012.  “Suspected Gunman, 5 Others Dead in Seattle
Shootings,” USA Today, May 30 (http://content.usatoday.com/
communities/ondeadline/post/2012/05/seattle-shootings-kill-3-
wound-3/1#.UFe1qKSe5eJ; accessed September 17, 2012).
Yang, J., Lee, J., Rao, A., and Touqan, N.  2009.  “Inter-Organiza-
tional Communications in Disaster Management,” in  Handbook
of Research on ICT-Enabled Transformational Government:  A
Global Perspective, V. Weerakkody, M. Janssen, and Y. Dwivedi
(eds.), Hershey, PA:  IGI Global.
Yoo, Y.  2010.  “Computing in Everyday Life:  A Call for Research
on Experiential Computing,” MIS Quarterly (34:2) pp, 214-231.
About the Authors
Onook Oh is an assistant professor with the Information Systems
and Management Group at Warwick Business School, University of
Warwick.  His research interests are in the areas of new modalities
of information exchange and social media, crowdsourcing, open
collaboration, and use of social media in information assurance and
extreme events.  His papers have been published or are forthcoming
in Communications of AIS, Information Systems Frontiers, AIS
Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, and Information
Systems Management.  He has also presented his papers at major
national and international IS conferences.  He completed his Ph.D.
at SUNY Buffalo.
Manish Agrawal is an associate professor in the department of
Information Systems and Decision Sciences of the College of
Business Administration at the University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida.  His current research interests include information security,
software quality, and the use of IT during extreme events.  His
articles have appeared or are to appear in journals including Man-
agement Science, Journal of Management Information Systems, MIS
Quarterly,  INFORMS Journal on Computing, and IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering.  His research received the Design
Science Award from the INFORMS Information Systems Society. 
He completed his Ph.D. at SUNY Buffalo.
H. R. Rao (corresponding author) is a Distinguished Service Pro-
fessor in the department of Management Science and Systems at
SUNY Buffalo, with a courtesy appointment with Computer Science
and Engineering as adjunct professor, and World Class University
Visiting Professor in the Department of Global Service Management
at Sogang Univeristy, South Korea.  His interests are in the areas of
management information systems, e-business, emergency response
management systems, and information assurance.  He received a
Fulbright fellowship in 2004.  His research is supported by the
National Science Foundation and the Department of Defense.  Dr.
Rao has served as coeditor of special issues of The Annals of Opera-
tions Research and Communications of the ACM, as associate editor
for Decision Support Systems, Information Systems Research, ACM
Transactions on MIS, and IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, and coeditor-in-chief of Information Systems Frontiers.
He has published over 150 papers in journals including Decision
Support Systems, Information Systems Research, ACM Transactions
on MIS, and IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. 
He completed his Ph.D. at Purdue University.
 424 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
Appendix A
Coding Scheme
 Variable Definition
Data
Type
Rumor (DV) A Twitter message which does NOT explicitly indicate a person (e.g., the prime minister of Indian
government), source (e.g., BBC, NDTV, website, etc.), context or known data to serve as a proof
or verification for the message.  The message MUST be topically relevant to the incidents under
this study (Mumbai terrorist attack, Toyota recalls, and Seattle shooting incident), and it MUST
refer to an object, person, or situation rather than an idea or theory (Bordia 1996; Buckner 1965;
Rosnow et al.1988; Rosnow and Kimmel 2000).
Examples 
 1. “stock markets a bit up n down.  The Sensex has always risen after terror attacks in 1993 and
2006.  Hope so this time too!” (coded as “1,” indicating a rumor)
 2. “Metro cinema attacked by grenades.  All were killed b4 nsg [National Security Guard, authors
added] storming” (coded as “1,” indicating a rumor)
 3. “Injured reports rise from 185 to 187 now.  #mumbai CNN.com” (coded as “0,” indicating not a
rumor)
Binary
Source 
Ambiguity
(IV)
A Twitter message which does not contain an external source (such as name of media or links to
external media, video, picture, etc.) or/and a Twitter message that expresses distrust and/or
ambiguity about the source.
Examples
 1. “#Mumbai IDesiTV.com Video stream link http://idesitv.com/starnews.php.  Very spotty info
about Oberoi/Trident and Santa Cruz Airport.” (coded as “1,” indicating that the message
expresses ambiguity about the source)
 2. “more hostages at the Cama hospital - #Mumbai” (coded as “1,” indicating that the message
does not provide information source)
 3. “Live twitter news feed for Mumbai attacks http://tinyurl.com/6b4wjj” (coded as “0,” indicating
that the information source is not ambiguous)
Binary
 Anxiety (IV) A Twitter message “that express rumor related fear, dread, anxiety or apprehension, and
statement that express a ‘threatened’ feeling” (Bordia 1996).
Examples
 1. “Scared to sleep not knowing what i’ll wake up to #mumbai” (coded as “1”)
 2.  “How will India bounce back?  Sadly I have no faith in the leadership to take control and stop
these heinous acts!” (coded as “1”)
 3. “Good going by the NSG ....  we are proud of what you did in #mumbai ...” (coded as “0,”
indicating no anxious feeling)
Binary
Personal
Involvement
(IV)
A Twitter message “that describe[s] experiences of the person, in the context of the rumor”
(Bordia 1996, p. 22).  A Twitter message that expresses that s/he is personally involved in,
committed to, or has some relationship to the event (McPhail 1991, p. 77).
Examples
 1. “hearing navy sounds at the helipad near my house ...  still 90+ snaps to be uploaded.  plan to
catch up  on TV now!” (coded as “1”)
 2. “im locked inside Vitthals restaurant with a few frnds.  shutters down .  this is as close as i can
get to the action #mumbai” (coded as “1”)
 3. “Still blown away by the twitter response to Mumbai” (coded as “0”)
Binary
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013 425

Oh et al./Community Intelligence and Social Media Services
 Variable Definition
Data
Type
Content
Ambiguity
(IV)
A Twitter message that expresses ambiguity or distrust about the Twitter message content.  A
Twitter message that expresses that the given information is conflicting in nature.  A Twitter
message for which a person expresses distrust or confusion (Allport and Postman 1947). 
“Questions seeking information.  This category does not include sarcastic remarks or persuasion
attempts” (Bordia 1996).
Examples
 1. “Just received SMS/calls with info on further shootings in Marine Lines, Fountain and Princess
Street; rumors?  or true?  #Mumbai” (coded as “1”)
 2. “what is #mumbai wisdom?  Number of terrorists?  No captured?  No killed?” (coded as “1”)
 3. “Interview of Navy commando's in CNN IBN” (coded as “0”)
Binary
Social Ties
(Directed
Messages)
(IV)
A Twitter message directed to specific user account.
Examples
 1. “@xxxx @yyyyy Nick, apparently yes.  For latest Mumbai tweets:  http://tinyurl.com/55h2m8”
(coded as “1”) 
 2. “@yyyy is your family safe?” (coded as “1”)
Binary
 426 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2/June 2013

SPECIAL ISSUE:  DIGITAL BUSINESS STRATEGY
HOW A FIRM’S COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT AND
DIGITAL STRATEGIC POSTURE INFLUENCE
DIGITAL BUSINESS STRATEGY
Sunil Mithas
Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland, Van Munching Hall,
College Park, MD  20742   U.S.A.  {smithas@rhsmith.umd.edu}
Ali Tafti
College of Business, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL  61820  U.S.A.  {atafti@illinois.edu}
Will Mitchell
Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON  CANADA  {william.mitchell@rotman.utoronto.ca}
and Duke University, Durham, NC  27708  U.S.A.  {will.mitchell@duke.edu}
Appendix
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013 A1

 Mithas et al./Influence of Competitive En vironment & Digital Strategic Posture
Table A1.  Firm Performance Model Showing the Effect of Current Year IT Investments on Tobin’s q
(Dependent Variable Is Tobin’s q).  Random Effects Panel Regression.  
(1)
Tobin’s q
 IT_STRATPOSTURE (Industry Norm Minus Firm’s IT investments) -0.710
(1.517)
 IT (current year) 3.653***
(1.182)
 IT × INDTURB -76.62***
(17.91)
 IT × HHI -16.12
(16.43)
 IT × INDGROWTH 82.85**
(36.89)
 IT × COMPUNC -14.77
(24.44)
Industry Turbulence (INDTURB)
 
-0.456
(0.950)
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
 
-0.754
(1.013)
 Industry Growth (INDGROWTH) 6.640***
(2.227)
 Competitive Uncertainty (COMPUNC) 0.913
(0.613)
 Lag Investment (IT) -1.249
(1.709)
 Related Diversification -2,901**
(1,167)
 Firm size:  Log(Employees) -0.0970
(0.0613)
 ADV -0.00294
(0.0378)
 RD -0.0404**
(0.0204)
Tobin’s q Industry Avg.  0.565***
(0.217)
 Observations 1,018
 Number of Firms 335
 Hausman test comparison with Fixed Effects 8.93 (p = 0.78)
 R² 0.22
 Wald χ² 196.3***
Robust standard errors in parentheses; ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10
The estimated model includes an intercept, physical capital intensity, market share, an indicator variable for regulated industry, and indicator
variables for year and industry.  Variables in interaction terms are mean centered.  We rescaled several variables to produce meaningful
  coefficient decimal places:  Competitive uncertainty (× 100), i ndustry growth (× 10), free cash flow (× 10,000), related divers ification (×
10,000).  The Hausman test statistic suggests no significant difference from fixed-effects panel estimates.
 A2 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013

 Mithas et al./Influence of Competitive En vironment & Digital Strategic Posture
Table A2.  Effect of Outsourcing Strategic Posture on IT Investments (Dependent Variable Is IT
Investments).  OLS Regression Estimates.  
(1)
IT Investments 
OS_STRATPOSTURE 0.000573*
(0.000313)
OS_STRATPOSTURE × INDTURB 
 
-0.00145
(0.00206)
OS_STRATPOSTURE × HHI 
 
-0.00100
(0.00128)
OS_STRATPOSTURE × INDGROWTH 
 
-0.00182
(0.00341)
OS_STRATPOSTURE × COMPUNC 
 
0.000786
(0.00316)
Industry Turbulence (INDTURB)
 
0.0218
(0.0308)
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
 
0.0120
(0.0169)
 Industry Growth (INDGROWTH) 0.0144
(0.0471)
Competitive Uncertainty (COMPUNC)
 
0.0124
(0.0360)
 Lag Investment (Outsourcing) 0.000590*
(0.000335)
 Related Diversification -40.39**
(18.71)
 Firm size:  Log(Employees) 0.00281***
(0.000900)
 Market share -0.0578***
(0.0209)
 Observations 519
 R² 0.219
 F stat 6.657***
Robust standard errors in parentheses.  ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10
The estimated model includes an intercept, free cash flow, and indicator variables for year and industry.  Variables in interaction terms are mean
 centered.  We rescaled several variables to produce meaningful coefficient decimal places:  Competitive uncertainty (× 100), in dustry growth
 (× 10), free cash flow (× 10,000), re lated diversification (× 10,000).
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013 A3

 Mithas et al./Influence of Competitive En vironment & Digital Strategic Posture
Table A3.  Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) Estimates
 Positive coefficient on IT_STRATPOSTURE or OS_STRATPO STURE suggests convergence in IT investment or out-
sourcing, respectively; negative coefficient suggests divergence; positive interaction effects suggest stronger convergence
due to environmental factors; and negative interactions suggest stronger divergence due to environmental factors.
(1)
IT Investment
(2)
Outsourcing Pct. of IT
 IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDTURB (H1 -) -6.156***
(1.078)
 IT_STRATPOSTURE × HHI (H2 +) -0.102
(0.701)
 IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDGROWTH (H3 +) 5.908***
(1.520)
 IT_STRATPOSTURE × COMPUNC -2.485***
(0.707)
 OS_STRATPOSTURE × INDTURB (H1 -) 1.769
(1.313)
 OS_STRATPOSTURE × HHi (H2 +) 0.673#
(0.461)
 OS_STRATPOSTURE × INDGROWTH (H3 +) 4.540***
(1.579)
 OS_STRATPOSTURE × COMPUNC 1.233
(1.234)
 Industry Turbulence (INDTUR) 0.0524*
(0.0290)
20.77
(17.40)
 Herfindahl-Hirshman Index (HHI) -0.00292
(0.0179)
-24.85**
(10.86)
 Industry Growth (INDGROWTH) -0.0174
(0.0390)
-38.69*
(23.37)
 Competitive  Uncertainty (COMPUNC) 0.0115
(0.0285)
-8.715
(16.83)
 Lag Investment (IT) 0.943***
(0.0596)
 Firm Size:  Log(Employees) 0.00120
(0.000728)
0.0716
(0.433)
 Related Diversification 0.668
(19.46)
21,839*
(11,828)
 Free Cash Flow -0.00375
(0.00493)
3.758
(2.998)
 Market Share -0.0276
(0.0187)
12.13
(11.14)
 IT_STRATPOSTURE (IT Strategic Posture) 0.0744
(0.0521)
  OS_STRATPOSTURE (Outsourci ng Strategic Posture) -0.0715
(0.0570)
 Lag Investment (Outsourcing) 0.661***
(0.0632)
  Observations 406 406
  R² 0.729 0.609
  F stat 42.10*** 24.51***
Standard errors in parentheses.  ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10; #p < 0.10 (one-tail)
The estimated models include an intercept and indicator variables for year and industry.  Variables in interaction terms are mean centered.  We
rescaled several variables to produce meaningful coefficient decimal places:  Competitive uncertainty (× 100), industry growth (× 10), free
cash flow (× 10,000), related diversification (× 10,000).
 A4 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013

 Mithas et al./Influence of Competitive En vironment & Digital Strategic Posture
Table A4.   Robustness Checks (Including Controls for Diversification and Number of Industry
Segments) Fixed-Effects Panel Regressions.  Dependent Variable Is IT Investment.
    (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
      β1 :  IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDTURB  (H1 -) -5 .944*** -7.399*** -7.274*** -5.306*** -7.994***
    (0.619) (0.598) (0.599) (0.603) (0.609)
     β2 :  IT_STRATPOSTURE × HHI (H2 +) 1.137* -0.104 -0.633 0.435 -0.392
    (0.642) (0.586) (0.631) (0.624) (0.585)
      β3:  IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDGROWTH (H 3 +) 4.809*** 3.018*** 2.616** 4.569*** 3.029***
    (1.195) (1.139) (1.151) (1.206) (1.129)
    IT_STRATPOSTURE × COMPUNC -4.344*** -2.177*** -2.508*** -5.608*** -2.110***
    (0.818) (0.781) (0.793) (0.758) (0.770)
      IT_STRATPOSTURE 0.0352 -0 .000771 0.0320 0.111** 0.0158
    (0.0530) (0.0479) (0.0500) (0.0498) (0.0471)
  NUM_SEGMENTS 0.000500 0.000468
 (0.00137) (0.00127)
 IT_STRATPOSTURE × NUM_SEGMENTS -0.128***
(0.0114)
 TOTALDIVERSE 0.00861 0.00863
 (0.00532) (0.00530)
  IT_STRATPOSTURE × TOTALDIVERSE -0.400*** -0.459***
 (0.0381) (0.0462)
     RELDIVERSE -0.000799 -0.00847 -0.00968 -0.00341 -0.00202
    (0.00636) (0.00711) (0.00712) (0.00666) (0.00619)
  IT_STRATPOSTURE × RELDIVERSE -0.272*** 0.177**
 (0.0693) (0.0794)
    INDTURB 0.0476* 0.0359 0.0341 0.0486* 0.0360
    (0.0261) (0.0247) (0.0247) (0.0265) (0.0246)
     HHI 0.202*** 0.173*** 0.164** 0.197*** 0.152**
    (0.0686) (0.0657) (0.0657) (0.0695) (0.0648)
     INDGROWTH 0.0812** 0.0702* 0.0691* 0.0795* 0.0667*
    (0.0409) (0.0388) (0.0387) (0.0415) (0.0386)
     COMPUNC (competitive uncertainty) -0.00738 -0.00975 -0.00782 -0.00200 -0.00800
    (0.0240) (0.0227) (0.0227) (0.0242) (0.0225)
     1 yr Lag IT Investment 0.462*** 0.353*** 0.390*** 0.568*** 0.425***
    (0.0657) (0.0603) (0.0624) (0.0606) (0.0577)
     Firm size:  Log(Employees) 0.000692 -0.00131 -0.00136 0.00118 -0.00138
    (0.00286) (0.00272) (0.00271) (0.00289) (0.00269)
     Free Cash Flow -0.00358 -0.00463 -0.00469 -0.00311 -0.00502
    (0.00524) (0.00497) (0.00496) (0.00530) (0.00493)
     Market share -0.0958 -0.0725 -0.0663 -0.0948 -0.0634
    (0.0599) (0.0572) (0.0572) (0.0606) (0.0564)
     Observations 1,225 1,225 1,225 1,225 1,225
     E² 0.530 0.580 0.583 0.521 0.587
     Number of firms 400 400 400 400 400
     F stat 47.90*** 55.65*** 53.50*** 46.23*** 57.13***
Standard errors in parentheses.  ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10
The estimated models include an intercept, and indicator variables for year and industry.  Variables in interaction terms are mean centered. 
 We rescaled several variables to produce meaningful coefficient decimal places:  Competitive uncertainty (× 100), industry grow th (× 10), free
cash flow (× 10,000), related diversification (× 10,000).
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013 A5

 Mithas et al./Influence of Competitive En vironment & Digital Strategic Posture
Table A5. Robustness Checks (Controlling for Current Year and Prior Year Performance)  Fixed-Effects
Panel Regressions.  Dependent Variable I IT investment.
   (1) (2) (3) (4)
  Tobin’s Q (current year) 0.00101 0.00101
 (0.000745) (0.000753)
  Tobin’s Q (prior year) 1.42e-05 -6.29e-06
 (0.000145) (0.000149)
    β1 :  IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDTURB  (H1 -) -5.291*** -5.327*** -5.336*** -5.328***
   (0.601) (0.637) (0.638) (0.639)
    β2 :  IT_STRATPOSTURE × HHI (H2 +) 0.443 0.489 0.486 0.501
   (0.623) (0.670) (0.670) (0.674)
    β3:  IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDGROWTH (H3 +) 4.546*** 4.397*** 4.415*** 4.401***
   (1.203) (1.278) (1.280) (1.282)
     IT_STRATPOSTURE × COMPUNC -5. 618*** -5.824*** -5.803*** -5.831***
   (0.757) (0.813) (0.814) (0.817)
    IT_STRATPOSTURE 0.111** 0.109** 0.110** 0.110**
   (0.0498) (0.0530) (0.0531) (0.0533)
   INDTURB 0.0478* 0.0636** 0.0640** 0.0636**
   (0.0263) (0.0311) (0.0311) (0.0313)
    HHI 0.195*** 0.207*** 0.211*** 0.209***
   (0.0692) (0.0774) (0.0774) (0.0780)
    INDGROWTH 0.0812** 0.0825* 0.0878* 0.0823*
   (0.0413) (0.0467) (0.0467) (0.0469)
    COMPUNC -0.00242 -0.00299 -0.000133 -0.00250
   (0.0242) (0.0287) (0.0289) (0.0292)
    1 yr Lag IT Investment 0.567*** 0.552*** 0.552*** 0.552***
   (0.0605) (0.0648) (0.0650) (0.0651)
    Firm size:  Log(Employees) 0.00121 0.000366 2.85e-05 0.000365
   (0.00288) (0.00323) (0.00322) (0.00324)
    RELDIVERSE -27.39 -27.73 -26.16 -26.71
   (64.00) (71.52) (72.59) (72.87)
    Free Cash Flow -0.00324 -0.00335 -0.00367 -0.00299
   (0.00529) (0.00586) (0.00791) (0.00813)
    Market share -0.0935 -0.0948 -0.0928 -0.0957
   (0.0604) (0.0652) (0.0650) (0.0656)
    Observations 1,225 1,071 1,066 1,062
    R² 0.521 0.526 0.525 0.526
    Number of firms 400 348 344 343
    F stat 48.84*** 41.04*** 40.84*** 38.72***
Standard errors in parentheses.  ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10
The estimated models include an intercept, and indicator variables for year and industry.  Variables in interaction terms are mean centered. 
 We rescaled several variables to produce meaningful coefficient decimal places:  Competitive uncertainty (× 100), industry grow th (× 10), free
cash flow (× 10,000), related diversification (× 10,000).
 A6 MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013

 Mithas et al./Influence of Competitive En vironment & Digital Strategic Posture
Table A6.  Using Rolling Averages of Strategic Posture Fixed-Effects Panel Regressions.  Dependent
Variable Is IT Investment.
(1)
Base Model
Same as Column 2 of
Table 3
(2)
Using Two-Year
Rolling Average for IT
Strategic Posture 
 β 1:  IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDTURB  (H1 -) -5.291***
(0.601)
 β 2:  IT_STRATPOSTURE × HHI (H2 +) 0.443
(0.623)
 β 3:  IT_STRATPOSTURE × INDGROWTH (H3 +) 4.546***
(1.203)
IT_STRATPOSTURE × COMPUNC -5.618***
(0.757)
 IT_STRATPOSTURE 0.111**
(0.0498)
 INDTURB 0.0478* 0.00915
 (0.0263) (0.0275)
  HHI 0.195*** 0.114*
 (0.0692) (0.0674)
  INDGROWTH 0.0812** 0.0202
 (0.0413) (0.0411)
  COMPUNC -0.00242 0.0237
 (0.0242) (0.0240)
  IT 0.567*** 0.572***
 (0.0605) (0.0546)
  Firm size:  Log(Employees) 0.00121 0.00397
 (0.00288) (0.00306)
  RELDIVERSE -27.39 -7.816
 (64.00) (67.70)
  Free Cash Flow -0.00324 -0.00446
 (0.00529) (0.00815)
  Market share -0.0935 -0.0599
 (0.0604) (0.0637)
SP 2 yr rolling × INDTURB -5.979***
(1.801)
 SP 2 yr rolling × HHI -0.592
(0.785)
 SP 2 yr rolling × INDGROWTH 13.42***
(1.969)
 SP 2 yr rolling × COMPUNC -2.634**
(1.295)
 SP 2 yr rolling = Avg(IT_STRATPOSTURE (t - 1), IT_STRATPOSTURE) -0.302***
(0.0792)
  Observations 1,225 731
  R² 0.521 0.628
  Number of firms 400 273
  F stat 48.84*** 43.83***
Standard errors in parentheses.  ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.10
The estimated models include an intercept, and indicator variables for year and industry.  Variables in interaction terms are mean centered.  We
rescaled several variables to produce meaningful coefficient decimal places:  Competitive uncertainty (× 100), industry growth (× 10), free cash
flow (× 10,000), related diversification (× 10,000).
MIS Quarterly Vol. 37 No. 2—Appendix/June 2013 A7

Copyright of MIS Quarterly is the property of MIS Quarterly & The Society for Information Management and
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

